.\" Manpage for osrep — Omega SREP
.\" View locally with:  man -l man/osrep.1
.TH OSREP 1 "April 2026" "Omega SREP 1.0a-beta.4" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
osrep \- huge-dictionary LZ77 preprocessor (Omega lineage)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osrep
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB-m\fIN\fR \fIINFILE\fR \fIOUTFILE\fR
.br
.B osrep
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB-d\fR \fIARCHIVE\fR \fIOUTFILE\fR
.br
.B osrep
\fB-i\fR \fIARCHIVE\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B osrep
is a content-defined-chunking and large-dictionary LZ77 preprocessor.
It scans an input stream for long-range duplicate byte sequences and emits a
small stream of unmatched bytes plus a list of (offset, length) match
records. The output is intended as input to a secondary entropy coder
(LZMA, ZPAQ, brotli, etc.) in a FreeArc-style pipeline; on its own it
typically compresses 30%–60% depending on input redundancy.

Omega SREP is a fork of upstream SREP 3.93a beta (Bulat Ziganshin, October
2014), extending it with a native FA-style dedup pre-pass
.RB ( -dup ),
deterministic seeding for reproducible archives
.RB ( --seed )
and a Windows 10/11 build path. The compression algorithm itself is
preserved: same input + same parameters produces a byte-identical match
stream to upstream.

The on-disk format extension is \fB.osr\fR (replaces upstream \fB.srep\fR);
old \fB.srep\fR files are not readable by
.B osrep
and vice versa (no backward compatibility by design).

.SH OPTIONS

.SS Compression methods

.TP
.B -m0
In-memory compression (REP algorithm). Works with
.B -d\fIBYTES\fR
to set the dictionary size.
.TP
.B -m1
Fixed-window content-defined chunking; matches verified by VMAC.
.TP
.B -m2
Order-1 content-defined chunking; matches verified by VMAC.
.TP
.B -m3
Match search via VMAC digest comparison. Default if no
.B -m
given. Compression memory ≈ 7-8% of input size.
.TP
.B -m4
Match search via re-reading the input file. Lowest compression memory
(≈ 3-4% of input).
.TP
\fB-m5\fR, \fB-mx\fR
Exhaustive byte-accurate match search. Best compression ratio, slowest.
Compression memory ≈ 7-9% of input.
.TP
\fB-m\fIN\fR\fBf\fR
Future-LZ output: decompression dictionary holds only future matches.
.TP
\fB-m\fIN\fR\fBo\fR
I/O LZ output: output file is used as the decompression dictionary
(decompression memory ≈ 24 MB).

.SS Common options

.TP
\fB-l\fIN\fR
Minimum LZ match length in bytes.
.TP
\fB-c\fIN\fR
Hash chunk size in bytes.
.TP
\fB-a\fIX\fR[\fB/\fIY\fR]
Compression accelerator: allocate
.I X
bytes per
.I L
input bytes,
.I Y
of which are set. Use
.B -a0
for slowest / least memory.
.TP
\fB-t\fIN\fR
Worker thread count for
.B -m1
/
.BR -m2 .
.TP
\fB-d\fIBYTES\fR
Dictionary size for
.BR -m0 .
Default 512 MB. Suffixes: k, m, g, t.
.TP
\fB-b\fIBYTES\fR
Compression block size. Default 8 MB.
.TP
\fB-mem\fIBYTES\fR
RAM cap for Future-LZ / Index-LZ decompression. Examples:
.BR -mem75% ,
.BR -mem600mb .
Excess goes to a virtual-memory file.
.TP
\fB-hash=\fIHASH\fR
Per-block hash. One of
.IR vmac ,
.IR siphash ,
.IR md5 ,
.IR sha1 ,
.IR sha512 .
Default
.IR vmac .
.TP
.B -hash-
Disable per-block checksums.
.TP
.BR -mmap ,
.BR -nommap
Force / disable memory-mapped I/O for match checking.
.TP
\fB-temp=\fIPATH\fR
Tempfile path override. Default uses
.B $TMPDIR
on POSIX,
.B %TEMP%
on Windows.
.TP
\fB-vmfile=\fIPATH\fR
Virtual-memory tempfile path.
.TP
\fB-vmblock=\fIBYTES\fR
Block size of the VM tempfile. Default 8 MB.
.TP
\fB-index=\fIFILE\fR
Read/write the match index in a separate file.
.TP
\fB-s\fIBYTES\fR
Explicitly specify input size (for stdin input). Default 25 GB.
.TP
.B -delete
Delete source file after successful (de)compression.
.TP
\fB-v[0..2]\fR
Verbosity level. Default 2.
.TP
\fB-rem\fIANYTHING\fR
Command-line remark; ignored. Useful in scripts.

.SS Modes

.TP
.B -d
Decompression. With
.BR -m0o ..\c
.BR -m5o ,
needs only ~24 MB beyond OS I/O buffers.
.TP
.B -i
Print archive metadata; do not decompress.

.SS Omega-only additions (F5 / F6)

.TP
.B -dup
Enable FA-style content-defined-chunking dedup pre-pass before SREP.
Long-range duplicates are stripped to a small chunk-table footer
.RB ( ODUP ); SREP only ever processes the unique-chunk body. Streaming
end-to-end so peak RAM is independent of input size. Auto-detected on
decompression. Incompatible with
.BR -m0 ;
recommend
.B -m3
/
.B -m4
/
.BR -m5 .
.TP
.B --dup-paranoid
Byte-compare each dedup hit against the previously-written unique chunk.
Eliminates the 64-bit hash collision window (≈ 1e-7 per million chunks)
at the cost of one disk seek per hit. RAM overhead negligible.
.TP
\fB--chunk-avg=\fIN\fR
CDC average chunk size in bytes. Default 4096.
.TP
\fB--chunk-min=\fIN\fR
CDC minimum chunk size. Default 1024.
.TP
\fB--chunk-max=\fIN\fR
CDC maximum chunk size. Default 16384.
.TP
\fB--chunk-buf=\fIN\fR
Buffer-bounded CDC: rolling hash resets every
.I N
bytes. Default 8 MB. Required for cross-block dedup of large identical
regions.
.TP
\fB--seed=\fIN\fR
Deterministic hash seed (uint64; decimal or
.B 0x
hex). Same seed + same input produces a byte-identical archive across
runs. Default behavior is random per-run (matches upstream SREP
exactly). Useful for content-addressed storage and reproducible builds.

.SS Help / version

.TP
.BR --help ", " -h ", " -?
Print synopsis and exit.
.TP
.BR --version ", " -V
Print version line and exit.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Generic warning (e.g., partial decompression).
.TP
.B 2
Command-line / option parsing error.
.TP
.B 3
I/O error.
.TP
.B 4
Compression / decompression / archive-format error.
.TP
.B 5
Out of memory.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TMPDIR
Tempfile directory on POSIX (also honored:
.BR TMP ,
.BR TEMP ).
.TP
.B TEMP
Tempfile directory on Windows.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B *.osr
Omega SREP archive. On-disk format documented in
.IR docs/format-spec.md .
.TP
.B *.srep
Upstream SREP archive (NOT readable by
.BR osrep ;
use upstream
.B srep
binary instead).

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Compress a tarball:
.PP
.RS 4
.B osrep -m4 backup.tar backup.osr
.RE
.PP
Decompress (auto-detects ODUP trailer if present):
.PP
.RS 4
.B osrep -d backup.osr backup.tar
.RE
.PP
Compress with the Omega F5 dedup pre-pass for long-range duplicate
workloads (backups, installer images):
.PP
.RS 4
.B osrep -dup -m4 backup.tar backup.osr
.RE
.PP
Reproducible archive (same seed → byte-identical output across runs):
.PP
.RS 4
.B osrep --seed=42 -m4 input.bin output.osr
.RE
.PP
FreeArc-style pipeline with ZPAQ as secondary entropy coder:
.PP
.RS 4
.B osrep -m5f -a0 data.tar - | zpaq a final.zpaq -
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Per-run hash seed makes archive bytes non-reproducible by default. Use
.B --seed=\fIN\fR
for byte-stable output.
.IP \(bu 2
Targets x86_64 only (Linux + Windows 10/11). 32-bit, big-endian, and
strict-alignment ports are explicitly out of scope.
.IP \(bu 2
.B -dup
peak RAM scales with the chunk table (~23 KiB per MiB of input at
default chunk parameters); for petabyte-scale inputs the chunk table
itself becomes a soft limit.

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
Original SREP: \fIhttps://web.archive.org/web/20161223135216/http://freearc.org/research/SREP.aspx\fR
.PP
FA 0.11 (successor / inspiration for
.BR -dup ):
\fIhttps://github.com/Bulat-Ziganshin/FA\fR
.PP
On-disk format: \fIdocs/format-spec.md\fR in the source tree
.PP
Bench numbers: \fIdocs/dup-bench.md\fR,
\fIdocs/upstream-comparison.md\fR

.SH AUTHORS
.PP
Original SREP / SuperREP: Bulat Ziganshin <Bulat.Ziganshin@gmail.com>
.PP
Omega SREP fork (this binary): \fIhttps://github.com/YadeWira/omega-srep\fR

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2009-2014 Bulat Ziganshin (original SREP).
Omega SREP additions are released under the same terms; see project
repository for license text.
